---
title: First Order Logic
cover: 'https://source.fomal.cc/img/default_cover_138.webp'
categories: discrete math
katex: true
description: >-
  Logic Behind Natural Language Proof, Syntax of First Order Logic, The
  semantics of first order language
abbrlink: c86fd2a
date: 2025-04-03 13:05:24
tags:
---

### Logic Behind Natural Language Proof
下面使用 $\vdash$ 表示推出。暂时不做严格定义。

**Example 1.**
* Assumptions: $A$ is a set, $R \subseteq A\times A$ is a binary relation, ...
* Proof step: In order to prove that $R$ is an equivalence relation on $A$, we prove that $k$ is reflexive on $A$, symmetric and transitive.
* Logic: If $\Phi \vdash \psi_1, \Phi \vdash \psi_2$ and $\Phi \vdash \psi_3$, then $\Phi \vdash \psi_1 \land \psi_2 \land \psi_3$
* Logic (Alternative): (1) $\psi_1, \psi_2, \psi_3 \vdash \psi_1 \land \psi_2 \land \psi_3$ (2) If $\Phi \vdash \psi_1, \Phi \vdash \psi_2, \Phi \vdash \psi_3$ and $\psi_1, \psi_2, \psi_3 \vdash \psi_4$, then $\Phi \vdash \psi_3$

**Example 2.**
* Assumptions: $A$ is a set, ...
* Proof step: Because $A$ is an inductive set, $\varnothing \in A$.
* Logic: $\phi \land \psi \vdash \phi$

**Example 3.**
* Proof step: We know that the highest digit of $2501^{2025}$ is either $1$ or not $1$.
* Logic: $\vdash \phi \lor \lnot \phi$


**Example 4.**
* Assumptions: A1, A2, B1 and B2 are sets, ...
* Proof step: We apply case analysis on whether $B_2 = \varnothing$ for proving $(A_1 \to B_1) \preceq (A_2 \to B_2)$
* Logic: If $\Phi, \psi_1 \vdash \psi_2$, $\Phi, \lnot \psi_1 \vdash \psi_2$, then $\Phi \vdash \psi_2$
* Logic (Alternative): (1) $\vdash \psi \lor \lnot \psi$; (2) If $\Phi, \psi_1 \vdash \psi_3$, $\Phi, \psi_2 \vdash  \psi_3$ and $\Phi \vdash \psi_1 \lor \psi_2$, then $\Phi \vdash \psi_3$

### Syntax of First Order Logic
只是用原子命题和逻辑连接词，表达能力不够。

**Example**
* Commutative law of addition: for any natural number $x$ and $y$, $x+y = y+x$
* $3+5 = 5+3$

这两个命题之间的关系无法由原子命题体现。

Suppose
* $P(t_1, t_2, t_3, t_4)$ means (informally) $t_1+t_2 = t_3+t_4$
* $c_{\text{three}}$ is a constant symbol representing $3$
* $c_{\text{five}}$ is a constant symbol representing $5$

Then 
* Commutative law of addition: $\forall x, \forall y, P(x, y, y, x)$
* $3+5 = 5+3$: $P(c_{\text{three}}, c_{\text{five}}, c_{\text{five}}, c_{\text{three}})$

**Example**
How to formulate the following sentence in a logic expression? 
The cube of cube of $32$ is a number ends in $2$.

Strategy #1:
- $P_1(t_1,t_2)$: the cube of $t_1$ ends in $t_2$.
- $c_c$: the cube of $32$.
- $P_1(c,c_{two})$: The cube of cube of $32$ is a number ends in $2$.

Strategy #2:
- $P_2(t_1,t_2)$: the cube of cube of $t_1$ ends in $t_2$.
- $c_{thirty-two}$: $32$.
- $P_2(c_{thirty-two},c_{two})$: The cube of cube of $32$ is a number ends in $2$.

在两个不同的 Strategy 中，对于同一个结论："The cube of cube of $32$ is a number ends in $2$."，可以做出两个推论：
* $\exists x, P_1(x, c_{\text{two}})$
* $\exists x, P_2(x, c_{\text{two}})$

但是想导出这两个推论，有需要对逻辑结构做不同的解读，这说明上面使用的逻辑语言的表达能力还不够。因此不仅要引入谓词符号，还需要引入函数符号。

- $P_3(t_1,t_2)$: $t_1$ ends in $t_2$.
- $f(t)$: the cube of $t$
- $c_{\text{thirty--two}}$: $32$.
- $P_3(f(c_{\text{thirty--two}}),c_{\text{two}})$: The cube of cube of $32$ is a number ends in $2$.

那么此时就可以说：
* $\exists x, P_3(f(x),c_\text{two})$
* $\exists x, P_3(f(f(x)), c_\text{two})$

**Definition 5** (FOL Syntax).
* Variables symbols: $x, y, z, \ldots$
* Constants symbols: $c_1, c_2, \ldots$
* Function symbols: $f, g, h, \ldots$
* Predicate symbols: $P, Q, R, \ldots$
* Terms ($t$): $x, y, z, \ldots , c_1, c_2, \ldots ,f(t_1, t_2, \ldots )$
* Proposition ($\phi$): $P(t), Q(t_1, t_2), \phi_1 \land \phi_2, \lnot \phi, \exists x\phi, \forall y \psi$

Predicate symbols, function symbols and constants forms the *symbol set* of a first order language.

**Example 6** (Quiz).
* If $x, y, z, \ldots$ are varibale symbols, $c_0, c_1, \ldots$ are constant symbols, $f, g, \ldots$are function symbols, and $P, Q, R, \ldots$ are predicate symbols, then
* which of the following are first order logic terms?
    * $x + 1, x + y, f(x, y), f(x) + g(y)$
    * $c_1 + c_2, f(g(c_1)), h(f(x), g(c_2))$
* which of the following are first order logic propositions?
    * $P(x), Q(f(c_0)), f(x) < f(x + 1), R(x, y) \land  R(y, x)$
    * $\forall x \exists y (x < y), \forall x\forall y (R(x, y) \lor  R(y, x))$

Answer: $f(x, y), f(g(c_1))$ and $h(f(x), g(c_2))$; $P(x), Q(f(c_0)), R(x, y)\land R(y, x)$ and $\forall x\forall y (R(x, y) \lor (y, x))$.
加号不是合法的symbol。

### The semantics of first order language
命题逻辑在给定真值指派之后就能得到真值，但是一阶逻辑就更加复杂。比如在使用量词的时候，量词的范围会影响真值。

**Definition 7** ($S$-structures).
Given a symbol set $S$, an $S$-structure $\mathcal{A} = (A, \alpha)$ contains
* a domain(论域) $A$, which is a nonempty set
* an interpretation of every predicate symbol, e.g. if $P$ is a symbol of binary predicate, then $\alpha(P)$ is a mapping from $A\times A \to \{ T, F \}$
* an interpretation of every function symbol, e.g. if $f$ is a symbol of unary function, then $\alpha(f)$ is a mapping from $A \to A$
* an interpretation of every constant symbol, e.g. if $c$ is a constant symbol, then $\alpha(c)$ is an element in $A$

上面四条，第一条用 $A$ 指定论域；后面三条用 $\alpha$ 解释一阶逻辑的符号（谓词符号，函数符号，常量符号），有了 $\alpha$ 之后，这些符号的意义才确定下来（就像命题逻辑中，$p$只是一个符号，只有给定了真值指派之后，真值才确定下来）。$S$ 指的就是一阶逻辑的符号集。

**Example 8.**
* $N$ is a unary predicate symbol.(一元谓词符号)
* $S = \{ N \}$ is a set of symbols.
* $\forall x (\lnot N(x))$ is a proposition of the $S$-language.
* For any $a \in \mathbb{R}, \alpha(N)(a) = T$ if $a^{2}<0$; otherwise $\alpha(N)(a) = F$.
* $\mathcal{A} = (R, \alpha)$ is an $S$-structure.
* $\forall x (\lnot N(x))$ is true on $\mathcal{A}$.

**Example 9.**
* $L$ is a binary predicate symbol.
* $f$ is a unary function symbol.
* $S = \{ L, f \}$ is a set of symbols.
* $\forall x(L(x, f(x)))$ is a proposition of the $S$-language.
* For any $a, b \in \mathbb{Z}^{+}, \alpha(L)(a, b) = T$ if $a<b$; otherwise $\alpha(L)(a, b) = F$.
* For any $a\in \mathbb{Z}^{+}$, $\alpha(f)(a) = 2a$
* $\mathcal{A} = (\mathbb{Z}^{+}, \alpha)$ is an $S$-structure.
* $\forall x(L(x, f(x)))$ is true on $\mathcal{A}$.